I've always found it curious
how biologists study life.
There's this saying,
"A biologist will learn
how a car works by poking at it,
removing one part at a time,
and seeing how it affects
the rest of the car.
On the other hand, an engineer
will learn how a car works
by taking it completely apart
and rebuilding it."
Take, for example,
the Human Genome Project,
one of the biggest breakthroughs
of the last century.
We spent over a decade mapping out
all three billion letters of our genome,
the complete set of DNA.
We thought that once we could read DNA
and apply that same principle,
poking and dissecting
one letter at a time,
that we could start
eradicating all human diseases.
But instead, we began to realize
just how little we actually understood
about the true function of DNA.
As a researcher,
I work on artificial intelligence
and trained as an engineer.
I learn by building things
and understand by creating.
Today, I want to share an idea
that can fundamentally change
how we study biology and life itself.
Instead of just reading and dissecting
DNA, we should be generating it.
And we can do this
by treating DNA as a language:
one that AI can learn to read,
write and, ultimately, build.
This idea led myself
and a team of researchers
at Stanford and the Arc Institute
with a sort of moonshot:
Can we generate an entire genome
from scratch using AI?
Build life from the ground up?
Now I understand the thought of feeding
the code of life into a generative AI
is both thrilling,
and, perhaps, unsettling.
But I came to realize
that if this was possible,
it could unlock some of the most
powerful breakthroughs
in science and medicine.
But I'll be honest, we had no idea
if AI could actually generate DNA.
In many ways, DNA is like a language.
It has grammar, structure,
sort of like sentences and paragraphs
that group together to form a story.
And these stories are passed down
through evolution,
generation by generation.
For humans, it’s been hard to comprehend
these stories written in DNA
in large part because of its scale.
DNA is extremely long,
and yet, at the same time,
sensitive to the smallest mistakes.
Imagine trying to write
something the length of 30,000 books
in a foreign language.
And that when you're off
by a single letter, one of billions,
this can mean the difference
between a healthy person
and a person
with a life-threatening disease.
And so to tackle these challenges,
together with my colleague Michael Poli,
we developed an AI that could generate
extremely long sequences of DNA,
500 times longer than previous AI models,
at high levels of detail.
We assembled a team
of scientists and AI experts
and gathered the largest collection
of DNA used to train AI,
80,000 whole genomes
fed into a model that we called ...
Evo.
And our goal was to create
something like a ChatGPT for DNA,
where you can prompt Evo
and describe the DNA you want,
and it would generate new sequences,
one letter at a time.
But there is one key difference.
With chatbots, you can
just read what it writes,
and you can decide
if it makes sense to you.
With DNA, it's not so simple.
It's not an intuitive human language.
How do you know if it's any real or good?
What does that even mean?
What we needed was a test,
a way to verify that what it wrote
would actually function.
And so we started with a familiar tool
in biology called CRISPR.
CRISPR is like a pair of molecular
scissors that can edit DNA,
used for things like gene therapy.
We asked Evo to make its own,
and generate its own version
of CRISPR from scratch,
which had never been done before.
It's got proteins and RNA inside,
it's a complex system.
And so our biologists
would take that generated DNA
and analyze it to see
how realistic does it look,
does it resemble something in nature?
How do its proteins fold?
Which all gave us a sense of its function.
But ultimately,
we have to test their ability to cut DNA
by actually building them in the lab.
And so that's what we did.
Now waiting for lab results can sometimes
be a nerve-racking experience.
Honestly, it's kind of like waiting
for the results of a pregnancy test.
You’re excited, anxious
and hopeful for a positive outcome.
And then, all of a sudden ...
these two little lines appear.
Just to be crystal clear,
these two lines are a good thing.
That's what we want.
(Laughter)
It means that our CRISPRs
cut a single strand of DNA into two,
in the exact right spot,
just like natural CRISPRs in the lab.
And so that's when we knew ...
it worked.
(Laughter)
(Applause)
Thank you.
What you're seeing here
is the world's first CRISPR system
designed entirely by AI.
Evo generated DNA that not only looked
realistic, but that actually functioned.
And so next, we decided
to go for that moonshot,
to try and generate
a whole genome from scratch.
And Evo was able to generate
hundreds of synthetic proteins
in a genome that resembled
those in nature.
But ultimately,
it was missing a few parts.
It wasn't yet complete,
more like a rough sketch of the genome.
However, this is just the first version.
That rough sketch of the genome
will become more detailed over time.
In fact, within years,
we anticipate AI will be able to generate
whole functional genomes.
In other words, AI will be able
to generate new life.
As this technology improves,
biology will shift
from discovery to design.
What might this world look like?
Let's look ahead.
In this future, we can make
truly personalized medicine.
Imagine prompting an AI like Evo
with your genome,
finding sources of diseases,
predicting your reaction to drugs,
and guiding treatment options
based on your own DNA.
But why even take medicine
when you might have a permanent cure?
We might choose to alter our DNA outright,
and we are beginning to see this today.
Recently, the FDA approved the first
gene therapy for sickle cell disease,
a painful, lifelong
condition of the blood.
And it works by just changing
a single gene in a person's DNA
to permanently cure the patient.
And now, there are
over 500 DNA-altering treatments
awaiting approval.
But let's say you're not comfortable
with changing your DNA.
What if we added new DNA?
All of our DNA is organized
into 23 pairs of chromosomes.
Chapters, if you will, in the book
that is our genome.
What if Evo learned to generate
a 24th chapter?
A whole new chromosome,
equipped with all the machinery needed
to fight hundreds of diseases on demand.
With DNA generation,
what is the limit of what's possible?
We've all seen "Jurassic Park."
We all thought it was science fiction.
And it is ...
mostly.
Researchers are now reconstructing
the genomes of extinct species,
with one company planning
to resurrect the woolly mammoth
by as early as 2028.
Now instead of bringing back
extinct species,
can we create new ones?
Researchers are now engineering
microbes for colonizing Mars.
If we one day wish
to be a multiplanetary species,
we'd have to figure out how to grow things
on Mars, make it more hospitable,
and possibly terraform.
And it is possible.
We have microbes on Earth
that can handle a range
of extreme conditions
that we call extremophiles.
Now I understand some
of these things might sound scary.
One of the biggest concerns
is biosecurity,
the potential to create bioweapons.
Can AI be used to generate
more infectious viruses?
Yes.
But AI can also defend and monitor
against these threats as well.
And so perhaps you feel like me
in that you have to choose between
advocating for innovation versus safety.
I'd encourage you to embrace both,
because stopping progress entirely,
I don't think it's practical.
We need to evolve with the technology,
monitor its capabilities,
and constantly be asking ourselves,
"What possible futures are we enabling?"
As humans, we've always sought
to understand the world around us.
That is in our nature.
But understanding alone
has rarely been enough.
For centuries, we've studied life
by observing and dissecting it.
But now, we're no longer
just reading life's code.
We now have the power to generate it.
And with AI, we’re at the beginning
of unlocking new medicines, science
and even entire new forms of life.
Do we make small edits?
Do we write entirely new chapters?
Or do we one day design life itself?
Because to truly understand biology,
we must create it.
And the future of life,
it's ours to build.
Thank you.
(Cheers and applause)